1. OPEN SOURCE - AN INTRODUCTION

Open source is a development method for software that harnesses the power of distributed peer review and transparency of process. The promise of open source is better quality, higher reliability, more flexibility, lower cost, and an end to predatory vendor lock-in.
The Open Source Initiative (OSI) is a non-profit corporation formed to educate about and advocate for the benefits of open source and to build bridges among different constituencies in the open-source community. 
One of the most important activities is as a standards body, maintaining the Open Source Definition for the good of the community. The Open Source Initiative Approved License trademark and program creates a nexus of trust around which developers, users, corporations and governments can organize open-source cooperation
2.  MERITS  & BENEFITS 

The following section identifies a number of potential benefits to be gained  :

Competency cultivation (or knowledge transfer). One of the primary benefits of any OSS strategy is the potential to learn — observers are able to gain knowledge from the inner workings of the solution. This is due to the openness both of the code and of the development process. Having in-house competency of the inner workings of solutions removes the risk and dependency associated with purchasing ‘black box’ solutions. To have competency in using black-boxed components can take one only so far before the need to have access to the inside becomes crucial. However the competency benefit flows both ways. From the solution provider’s perspective, having the customer as part of the development team can be extremely beneficial. It enables the provider to more accurately address the real needs of customers. This is similar to the agile practice of an ‘on-site customer’ shift for both developers, managers and the company as a whole. To succeed in an OSSD approach one needs to cultivate the disposition that “it is better to give than to receive”. Developers and the team itself need to realise that whatever they do affects not only themselves, but also a whole community outside their sphere of control. Generalising and working as part of a community may thus introduce extra and unfamiliar burdens on the company. The ‘dictatorial’ development approach to which most companies are accustomed is therefore lost in a  Community approach such as OSSD. Additionally, as is the case with most community based efforts, there is a potential for bureaucratic baggage which could reduce the agility of the project. As stated before, the cost associated with hosting an OSS (even more so within POS) may be significant, even outweighing the potential savings that OSS offers. Being the sponsor of an OSS project entails investing hardware, developers, time and administrative resources.
From a business perspective, the purchase cost of software is only one factor; total cost of ownership (TCO) is what really matters.  Other things being equal, the solution with lowest TCO is usually the most desirable one.  Arguments in favour of low TCO for open source software include :

•	Possibly zero purchase price
•	Potentially no need to account for copies in use, reducing administrative overhead
•	Claimed reduced need for regular upgrades (giving lower/nil upgrade fees, lower management costs)
•	Near-zero vulnerability to viruses eliminating need for virus checking, data loss and downtime
Some longer term claims are more difficult to substantiate yet they need to be taken into account :
•	Better adherence to standards permits competition in the market, reducing vendor lock-in and consequent monopoly pricing
•	Availability of source code provides greater continuity and security againt
-	financial collapse of vendors of key products
-	vendors choosing to withdraw support for unprofitable products
Protection against being required to fit your IT strategy to the cash needs of your software suppier
3.  MYTHS 
Looking around the world, Linux hype has been loudest in emerging markets. It is completely logical to expect that software that bears low acquisition costs, and is even free in some cases, would have the most potential in emerging markets. So far, we have not found that to be the case. Even in these markets, migration issues have made it more difficult to adopt Linux and in many places, pirated Microsoft products have been low-cost competition to Linux.
The biggest reason that organizations are considering Linux and OSO is because they think it will save them money. Some also talk about having more control if they can get source code and about having a more secure environment, but cost is still the top issue according to our clients, and even security has cost implications. In 2003, the Linux total cost of ownership (TCO) and return on investment (ROI), finding that some structured-task workers could see ROI from a Linux migration if they ran older Windows versions, were moved from an unlocked Windows to a locked Linux environment and had relatively few applications to move. 
Myth 1: Open-source development is a new fad. Freely available and extendible software has existed for many years and in many forms. In particular, creating and sharing software was synonymous with the development of Unix. 
Myth 2: OSS products cost nothing. There are two separate cost issues. The first concern is acquisition costs. Although an OSS product is typically downloadable free of charge, it can also be sold and distributed for a charge. For example, with Red Hat, Linux can be downloaded free of charge, although Red Hat also sells it under various pricing schemes. What the user pays for in the latter case is not the right to use the software, but for accountability and support from the vendor. Another important but frequently overlooked issue with the cost of "free" software is that the price of acquisition is a fraction of the product's TCO. Deployment, training, support and decommissioning costs must be factored into any total cost formula. 
4.  SOME OF THE POPULAR PACKAGES ON OPEN SOURCE
BLOGS
A blog is a user generated website, made up of usually short, frequently updated posts that are arranged chronologically. The content and purposes of blogs varies--from links and commentary about other web sites, to news about a company/person, to diaries, photos, poetry, mini-essays, project updates, even fiction. Blog posts are like instant messages to the web.

Apache Roller
It is a Java-based, full-featured, multi-blog, multi-user, open source weblog server. Roller was originally written by Dave Johnson. Apache Roller 3.0 is now available to be downloaded.
b2evolution
It is a multi-lingual, multi-user, multi-blog publishing system written in PHP and backed by a MySQL database. It includes features such as file & photo management, advanced skinning, multiple blogs support as well as detailed user permissions.
Bblog
It is a powerful, elegant personal web publishing system written in PHP and utilizing a MySQL database. It is used to manage frequently updated Web content, especially Weblogs. It is released as free, open source software distributed under the GNU General Public License.
Nucleus CMS
It is an open-source blog management software package written in PHP, with a MySQL backend. It allows for maintaining multiple blogs with multiple authors on the same site. It is a light content management system and can be extended using plugins.
OpenCMS
It is a Professional level Open Source Website Content Management System. OpenCms helps to create and manage complex websites easily without knowledge of html . It is based on Java and XML technology.
5.  THE WAY TO KNOWLEDGE
Open source software provides users with freedoms not obtainable from proprietory software, this includes the freedom to obtain, use, modify and distribute the software. access to information and communication technology. It also aims to initiate, facilitate, support and fund initiatives that will:
•	Increase open source awareness 
•	Increase open source adoption and usage 
•	Increase open source skills 
•	Increase access to open source software 
•	Open Source Learning Centres Background 
From its very beginning the idea of Open Source Software (OSS) has been highly political. The principle of publishing the source code of software and allowing its redistribution contributes to a free society, where one is able to help one’s neighbours by lending or giving them software without legal consequences. This Free Software Movement, where “free” is interpreted in the political but not in the commercial sense, has gained a considerable momentum since its origins in the 1970s. This is mainly due to famous and successful OSS projects like the Linux operating system and the Apache web server. 
6.  EFFECTS OF OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE ON DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
One of the main political arguments in favour of the adoption of OSS strategies by public institutions is the notion of technological independence. Governments around the world are increasingly aware of their growing dependence on proprietary standards and software for carrying out day to day public administration. The fact that software for processing highly critical data is usually shipped without any warranty, coupled with a tendency for ever greater concentration software production, presents a very real threat to any highly automated administrative structure. This is especially true for governments that wish to provide efficient and transparent services through e-government initiatives. 
Many governments in the industrial world are slowly switching to an OSS policy. The European Union, which funds a number of OSS projects, and the City of Munich, which uses Linux, are two examples. But a growing number of governments promoting OSS are from developing countries or countries in transition. A reason for this might be the history of these countries that makes them especially sensitive to all forms of dependence
It is this open feature of the OSS development process that creates opportunities for developing countries to participate in the technological developments in this area. This is in contrast to commercial software, which is mainly developed in industrial countries and then sold to developing countries. Thus, OSS can be considered as one means for bridging the digital divide between the developing and the developed world. 
OSS is a rich source of technological knowledge for developing countries. It should be pointed out that in the case of OSS “cheap” does not imply “low-quality”. The opposite is, in fact, the case: the offered technology is of high quality, often outperforming commercial products. The high quality is the outcome of team work among idealistic and self-motivated people who freely share their knowledge via the Internet. It is now recognised that it is the very publication of the source code that makes the validation and verification phase more efficient than that of conventional software, since the costly ‘debugging’ is done in parallel. As a consequence, the OSS Apache powers 60% of the worlds webservers today.
7.  OSS ACROSS THE WORLD
In large parts of the world where the average per capita income is often less than the cost of a computer, the current phenomenal price of software turns millions into "pirates". In these parts of the globe, words such as free or low cost are not necessarily associated with low-quality, but offer to include millions who otherwise would be simply left out in the cold.
Because GNU/Linux is open source, there are no mountains of secrecy blocking replicability. So prices of the same fall to a point which is dramatically low compared to proprietary software and thus affordable to the millions.
From Pakistan--Low-Cost Computers
Pakistan Ministry of Science and Technology says that some 50,000 low cost computers are to be installed in schools and colleges all over Pakistan. These will be PII computers, each being sourced for less than $100 a piece, he says.
Proprietary software for these PCs would cost a small fortune. Surely more than what the computers cost. But, using GNU/Linux ensures that the overall prices are kept low. Pakistan is seriously considering the use of StarOffice office as well, saving thousands of rupees over using more expensive and wholly proprietary office software.
In Africa too, GNU/Linux is making its impact felt. At one point, they got an idea to set up an Open Source Foundation for Africa. They are working on it."
South Africa's network is perhaps the most popular among the continent. Dandjinou, as ISOC (Internet Society) chairman for Benin, was able to organise a conference on this subject. UNDP has been experimenting with such technologies since 1994.
Spat in Malaysia
In Malaysia, in end-March, the Kuala Lumpur newspapers reported a verbal spat between the global software giant Microsoft and the fledging-but-influential Open Source movement in that country.
